Programming for Biologists (MMG1002H)

Assignment 2
10 Points

Assignment goals:
•	Practice R concepts learned in class
•	Practice writing your own R programs

Part I: Editing and running R scripts to process sequence data (2 points)
Your goal is to edit and run an R script that we’ve mostly written for you. Once you modify it correctly, this script will read in a DNA sequence from a file and perform some simple processing.
(1) Download the process_sequence.r script from the course website 
(2) Open the script using a text editor. Study the code, and guess what it will do to your gene sequence. Modify it so that it will load your sequence file (seq.fasta) (HINT: notice the fileName variable). Run it, and include the output in your assignment write-up.

Part II: Debugging R scripts (2 points)
Debug an R script that we’ve written (badly) for you. Find and fix all errors. Remember the best way to fix bugs is to start at the top and “Edit, Run, and Revise”.
(1) Download the buggy_script.r script from the course website
(2) Fix any bugs in the script until the R interpreter runs it without any warnings or errors. When it’s fixed, you should get the following output:

this Seems to be ok
6 
AAAATTTT 
------------------- 
myemail.utoronto.ca 
What’s going on here?

Part III: Practice with numeric and string operators (2 points)
(1) Create a “assignment2” folder and download the “stringnumber_practice.r” script from the course website

(2) Fill in the code or answer the questions where requested. There are five total places where you modify the script or answer questions related to it.

Part IV: Writing your first R program (4 points)
Write a script that reads in an RNA sequence from a file, computes simple statistics on the sequence, translates the RNA sequence into the corresponding amino acid sequence, and outputs the result to a file.
(1) To help you get started, we’ve written a skeleton R script for you (translate_sequence.r), which you can download.
As well as the sequence file we will use for the assignment (assignment2_sequence.txt)

(2) Open the script in a text editor and add the missing pieces that are described in the comments. Your script should do all of the following:
a. Open the sequence file
b. Read in the sequence
c. Print the length of the sequence
d. Get the coding portion of the sequence (bp 61-end)
e. Fill in code that translates codons into amino acids, so that you get a complete amino acid sequence
f. Print the final amino acid sequence to the output file

HINT: here’s a reference table for the codons that appear in the (fake) example sequence:
AUG Start 
UUC (Phe/F) Phenylalanine 
CUU (Leu/L) Leucine 
CCA (Pro/P) Proline 
ACC (Thr/T) Threonine 
GAU (Asp/D) Aspartic acid 
CGA (Arg/R) Arginine 
UGA Stop

Submitting your assignment
When you’re finished with the assignment, make a report of any questions you answered plus any requested output, and gather the scripts that you modified. Place them all in a folder, and create a single archive file called assignment2.tar.gz. Remember, you’ll need to use a command like this:

tar –czf assignment2.tar.gz <your name>-Assignment2

You can also use zip or a different tool (on a mac press right-click on the folder and choose “compress”).

When you’re finished, upload the assignment2.tar.gz file to quercus. You only need to upload your single file that contains all your answers and output for this assignment.

You’re finished with Assignment 2!
